feat: Add documentation on builder inference (#2621)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/using-builders-with-builder-inference.md

[//]: # (title: Using builders with builder type inference)

Kotlin supports _builder type inference_ (or builder inference), which is a type inference flavour that comes in handy 

> when writing generic builders. It helps the compiler infer the type arguments of a builder call based on the type information 

Reviewer: > when writing generic builders

Actually, it comes in handy when _using_ generic builders. BI works at call site.

Reviewer: Maybe it's possible to use something common like "when working with generic builders"

Author: Yeap, changed to "when working with generic builders"

As you can see, builder inference allows omitting type arguments while using generic builders.

## Writing own builders

### Requirements for enabling builder inference

> Before Kotlin 1.6.0, enabling builder inference for a builder function required the [`@BuilderInference`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-builder-inference/) 
> annotation to be present on a builder lambda parameter. In 1.6.0, you can omit the annotation on condition of using
> the compiler option `-Xenable-builder-inference` both on your and client's side.
> 
{type="note"}

To let builder inference work for your own builder, make sure its declaration has a builder lambda parameter of a 
function type with receiver. There are also two requirements to a receiver type:

1. It should use the type arguments that builder inference is supposed to infer. For example:
   ```kotlin
   fun <V> buildList(builder: MutableList<V>.() -> Unit) { ... }
   ```
   
   > Note that passing type parameter's type directly like `fun <T> myBuilder(builder: T.() -> Unit)` is not yet supported.
   > 
   {type="note"}

> 2. It should provide public members that contain the corresponding type parameters in their signature. For example:

Reviewer: Sorry, it seems I haven't mentioned it in the internal doc, but extensions are also possible to use:
```
class ItemHolder<T> {}

fun <T> ItemHolder<T>.foo(x: T) {}

fun <T> itemHolderBuilder(builder: ItemHolder<T>.() -> Unit): ItemHolder<T> =
    ItemHolder<T>().apply(builder)

fun test(s: String) {
    val itemHolder1 = itemHolderBuilder { // Type of itemHolder1 is ItemHolder<String>
        foo(s)
    }
}
```

information about the type argument.

Consider the example with [`buildList()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/build-list.html):

```kotlin
val result = buildList {
    val x = get(0)
}
```

Here `x` has a type of postponed type variable: the `get()` call returns a value of `E` type but `E` itself is not yet 
fixed. At this moment, a concrete type for `E` is unknown. 

When a value of postponed type variable gets associated with some concrete type, builder inference uses this association 
to infer the resulting type of the corresponding type argument. For example:

```kotlin
val result = buildList {
    val x = get(0)
    val y: String = x
} // result has the List<String> type inferred
```

After the postponed type variable gets assigned to a variable of the `String` type, builder inference can infer `E` into
`String`.

Note that you can always call `equals()`, `hashCode()`, and `toString()` functions with a postponed type variable as a 
receiver. Once the postponed type variable gets associated with some concrete type, you can use it as a call argument, 

> call available extensions, and access available properties.

Reviewer: > Once the postponed type variable gets associated with some concrete type, you can use it as a call argument, 
call available extensions, and access available properties.

Haven't got it. Inside a builder lambda, we have _always_ not fixed yet type variable (postponed type variable). What is the difference between the state "associated with some concrete type" and "not associated yet"? Associating is an adding constraints technically, but not variable fixation. We fix postponed variables only after _full_ analysis of a builder lambda. States "added some constraints" and "there aren't any added constraints yet" actually the same.

Author: Thank you, I indeed got it wrong. Changed the wording in multiple places of this section. [Please take a look at the last commit with review fixes.](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin-web-site/pull/2621/commits/f4e87dcde0888c7a1cfff7f69a22dc4cb13ed26e) I removed the sentence you cited here because now I get that it's about contributing type information, which we describe in the next section.

          takeListOfStrings(this)
      } // result3 has the List<String> type
  }
  ```
* Taking a callable reference to lambda receiver's member:
  ```kotlin
  fun main() {
      val result = buildList {
          val x: KFunction1<Int, Float> = ::get
      } // result has the List<Float> type
  }
  ```
  ```kotlin
  fun takeFunction(x: KFunction1<Int, Float>) { ... }

  fun main() {
      val result = buildList {
          takeFunction(::get)
      } // result has the List<Float> type
  }
  ```
* Using nested interdependent builder inference calls.

Note that the Kotlin compiler uses builder inference only if regular type inference cannot infer a type argument.
It means you can contribute a type information outside a builder lambda, and then builder inference analysis is not
required. Consider the example:

```kotlin
fun someMap() = mutableMapOf<CharSequence, String>()

fun <E> MutableMap<E, String>.f(x: MutableMap<E, String>) { ... }

fun main() {
    val x: Map<in String, String> = buildMap {
        put("", "")
        f(someMap()) // Type mismatch (required String, found CharSequence)
        // Type mismatch appears because builder inference didn't work here,

>         // the expected Map<in String, String> type is specified outside a builder lambda

Reviewer: For clarity, we can add "...and builder lambda is being analysed with already fixed receiver's type"

Author: [See the commit.](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin-web-site/pull/2621/commits/63cc850b733dd2fccf8b250c9064ce0bf3628b49)

[//]: # (title: Using builders with builder type inference)

Kotlin supports _builder type inference_ (or builder inference), which can come in useful when you are working with 
generic builders. It helps the compiler infer the type arguments of a builder call based on the type information
about other calls inside its lambda argument.

Consider this example of [`buildMap()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/build-map.html)
usage:

```kotlin
fun addEntryToMap(baseMap: Map<String, Number>, additionalEntry: Pair<String, Int>?) {
   val myMap = buildMap {
       putAll(baseMap)
       if (additionalEntry != null) {
           put(additionalEntry.first, additionalEntry.second)
       }
   }
}
```

> We don't have enough type information here to infer type arguments in a regular way, but builder inference can

Author: ```suggestion
There is not enough type information here to infer type arguments in a regular way, but builder inference can
```

analyze the calls inside the lambda argument. Based on the type information about `putAll()` and `put()` calls,
the compiler can automatically infer type arguments of the `buildMap()` call into `String` and `Number`. 

> Builder inference allows us to omit type arguments while using generic builders.

Author: ```suggestion
Builder inference allows to omit type arguments while using generic builders.
```

}
```

Here `x` has a type of postponed type variable: the `get()` call returns a value of type `E`, but `E` itself is not yet
fixed. At this moment, a concrete type for `E` is unknown.

When a value of a postponed type variable gets associated with a concrete type, builder inference collects this information
to infer the resulting type of the corresponding type argument at the end of the builder inference analysis. For example:

```kotlin
val result = buildList {
    val x = get(0)
    val y: String = x
} // result has the List<String> type inferred
```

After the postponed type variable gets assigned to a variable of the `String` type, builder inference gets the information
that `x` is a subtype of `String`. This assignment is the last statement in the builder lambda, so the builder inference
analysis ends with the result of inferring the type argument `E` into `String`.

Note that you can always call `equals()`, `hashCode()`, and `toString()` functions with a postponed type variable as a
receiver.

### Contributing to builder inference results

Builder inference can collect different varieties of type information that contribute to the analysis result.
It considers:

> * Calling methods on a lambda's receiver that use the type parameter's type:

Author: ```suggestion
* Calling methods on a lambda's receiver that use the type parameter's type
```

  ```kotlin
  val result = buildList {
      // Type argument is inferred into String based on the passed "value" argument
      add("value")
  } // result has the List<String> type inferred
  ```

> * Specifying the expected type for calls which return type parameter's type:

Author: ```suggestion
* Specifying the expected type for calls that return the type parameter's type
```

  ```kotlin
  val result = buildList {
      // Type argument is inferred into Float based on the expected type
      val x: Float = get(0)
  } // result has the List<Float> type
  ```
  ```kotlin
  class Foo<T> {
      val items = mutableListOf<T>()
  }

  fun <K> myBuilder(builder: Foo<K>.() -> Unit): Foo<K> = Foo<K>().apply(builder)

  fun main() {
      val result = myBuilder {
          val x: List<CharSequence> = items
          // ...
      } // result has the Foo<CharSequence> type
  }
  ```

> * Passing postponed type variables' types into methods which expect concrete types:

Author: ```suggestion
* Passing postponed type variables' types into methods that expect concrete types
```

  ```kotlin
  fun takeMyLong(x: Long) { ... }

  fun String.isMoreThat3() = length > 3

  fun takeListOfStrings(x: List<String>) { ... }

  fun main() {
      val result1 = buildList {
          val x = get(0)
          takeMyLong(x)
      } // result1 has the List<Long> type

      val result2 = buildList {
          val x = get(0)
          val isLong = x.isMoreThat3()
      // ...
      } // result2 has the List<String> type
  
      val result3 = buildList {
          takeListOfStrings(this)
      } // result3 has the List<String> type
  }
  ```

> * Taking a callable reference to the lambda receiver's member:

Author: ```suggestion
* Taking a callable reference to the lambda receiver's member
```

  
      val result3 = buildList {
          takeListOfStrings(this)
      } // result3 has the List<String> type
  }
  ```
* Taking a callable reference to lambda receiver's member:
  ```kotlin
  fun main() {
      val result = buildList {
          val x: KFunction1<Int, Float> = ::get
      } // result has the List<Float> type
  }
  ```
  ```kotlin
  fun takeFunction(x: KFunction1<Int, Float>) { ... }

  fun main() {
      val result = buildList {
          takeFunction(::get)
      } // result has the List<Float> type
  }
  ```
* Using nested interdependent builder inference calls.

At the end of the analysis, builder inference considers all collected type information and tries to merge it into 
the resulting type. See the example.

```kotlin
val result = buildList { // Inferring postponed type variable E
    // Considering E is Number or a subtype of Number
    val n: Number? = getOrNull(0)
    // Considering E is Int or a supertype of Int
    add(1)
    // E gets inferred into Int
} // result has the List<Int> type
```

So the resulting type is the most specific type that corresponds to the type information collected during the analysis.

> If given type information is contradictory and cannot be merged, the compiler reports an error.

Author: @petukhovv This is the additional info you requested in DM. I tried to translate terms like upper or lower bounds into sub- and supertypes.

Reviewer: Looks good to me
